1    PHIL 110 – Introduction to Logic and Reasoning  Fall 2026  Mon. 10:30 – 12:20 @ AQ 3181  Instructor: Bruno Guindon Email: bguindon@sfu.ca Office: WMC 5652 Office hours:  Thu. 12:00 – 14:00 TA Email  Office hours Tutorial sections Elliott DeWitte elliott_dewitte@sfu.ca Tue. 12:00 – 14:00  @ WMC 4609 D102, D103, D105, D110 Jiaqi Yan jya309@sfu.ca Mon. 15:00 – 17:00 @ WMC 4604 D101, D104, D106, D109  Course description This course examines the main formal elements of deductive logic, which is primarily concerned with correctly deducing a conclusion from given premises, or what is often called “valid inference”, “logical consequence”, or “following logically from”. These ideas are introduced using a special language, FOL, which abbreviates “first-order logic”. We develop this language first using a special case, where we have names of objects and predicates corresponding to properties and simple relations of those objects. This gives rise to elementary sentences. We then look at some ways to connect them—with what we call “connectives”—to form more complex sentences. This yields what is often called “propositional” or “truth-functional logic” an important part of logic expressed in a fragment of FOL. We give a precise definition of “valid inference”/“logical consequence” here. We then proceed to develop a proof system (a system of deduction) for this—i.e., a way of deriving logical consequences from given sentences as a starting point. We end the course by looking at a more complex version of FOL, based on quantifiers and variables, which gives a correspondingly more complex means of expression, and along with this we expand to a correspondingly more complex system of deduction.   Course objective An introductory study of logic provides excellent preparation for intellectual work in many other disciplines. Students from all faculties will benefit from learning various methods of sound reasoning—methods that prize precision, clarity, rigor, practice, and patience. Students in this course should expect to develop an enhanced ability to engage in disciplined argument and to write in an organized and focused way. By the end of the course, students will be able to: • Assess the quality of an argument using formal methods • Appreciate the general principles of good reasoning   • Determine the validity of an argument in terms of its logical form • Symbolize English arguments using logical notation introduced in the course • Translate sentences expressed in logical notation into English 
2   • Demonstrate an understanding of basic logical concepts (truth-functions, validity, soundness, deduction, and quantification)  Required Text • forallx:SFU, P.D. Magnus, T. Donaldson, & B. Guindon (2026)  A free PDF version is available on Canvas.   Formal logic is very much a subject where practice is essential, and where the exercises really instil familiarity with the material. Examples are to be found in abundance in the textbook, and should be worked through as a matter of routine, without being instructed to do so. The questions on the exam and assignments will be somewhat similar in form to these. Some of them will be challenging, thus, not just asking you to regurgitate what you have learnt, but to use this in ways which might not be entirely familiar.   Evaluation • 2 in-lecture midterm exams (15 % each, 30% total) • 2 in-tutorial quizzes (10% each, 20% total) • Final exam (40 %) • Tutorial attendance (5%) • Tutorial participation (5%)  Grading scale  The grading scale for this course will be determined at the end of term.   Participation Attendance at weekly tutorials will count for 5% of your final mark. You are permitted to miss two tutorials without penalty. Another 5% of your final mark will go towards active contribution during weekly tutorials.   Attending lecture  While I do not keep track of attendance during lecture, attending lecture is considered a course requirement. Evaluation of student work will reflect the expectation that students attend lecture regularly. Contributions in lecture is encouraged—e.g., asking questions or answering questions posed by the instructor. Lectures will not be recorded.   Warning Many students standardly find the second half of the course more difficult and complicated than the first. Thus, finding the initial stages easy is not a sign that you will find the whole course so. Understanding the material is also by its nature cumulative; one cannot neglect the course for a few classes, and then expect to understand the new material.  Slides  Slides will be distributed via Canvas.   
3   Copyright Instructor-generated course material, including material posted on Canvas is protected by law and may not be copied or distributed in any form or in any medium without explicit permission of the instructor. That means that you may not upload any of the course material to a website like CourseHero.    Policy on missed quizzes, midterms, and final exams Make-up quizzes, midterms, and final exams are allowed only for documented emergencies or university-approved conflicts. Each assessment will have one designated make-up date only. If a student cannot attend the scheduled make-up, the grade will be recorded as zero. Students must contact the course instructor or TAs at least 24 hours prior to the assessment to request deferral. Documentation must be submitted within 48 hours of the missed assessment.  Academic honesty and integrity Here is a statement from the SFU website regarding academic integrity: “Each student is responsible for his or her conduct as it affects the University community. Academic dishonesty, in whatever form, is ultimately destructive of the values of the University. Furthermore, it is unfair and discouraging to the majority of students who pursue their studies honestly. Scholarly integrity is required of all members of the University.” It is your responsibility to familiarise yourself with SFU’s policies on academic integrity and plagiarism. Useful information can be found here and here.   .    
4   Provisional Reading Schedule  PHIL 110 – Introduction to Logic and Reasoning Fall 2026  Date Topics   Readings Notes    Week 1    Mon. Sep. 14  Introduction Ch. 1: What is logic? Tutorials start on Tuesday Sep. 15 and onward    Week 2   Mon. Sep. 21  Part 1: Truth-functional logic Ch. 2: Atomic sentences and the Boolean connectives     Week 3   Mon. Sep. 28  Validity, logical truth, logical equivalence Ch. 3: Truth tables     Week 4   Mon. Oct. 5  Conditionals, truth-functional completeness Ch. 4: Conditionals Quiz 1 in tutorials    Week 5   Mon. Oct. 12  Thanksgiving Day No readings Class cancelled    Week 6   Mon. Oct. 19  Midterm 1 No readings  In lecture, closed book    Week 7  Mon. Oct. 26 Introducing proofs in truth-functional logic Ch. 5: Introducing proofs     Week 8    Mon. Nov. 2 Continuing proofs in truth-functional logic Ch. 6: Proofs involving conditionals and negation Quiz 2 in tutorials  Week 9   Mon. Nov. 9  Part 2: First-order logic Ch. 7: Introducing the quantifiers     Week 10   
5   Mon. Nov. 16  Introducing proofs in first-order logic Ch. 8: Proofs involving universal quantifiers   Week 11   Mon. Nov. 23  Midterm 2  No readings  In lecture, closed book  Week 12   Mon. Nov. 30  Continuing formal proofs in first-order logic, Soundness and completeness theorems for first-order logic Ch. 9: Proofs involving existential quantifiers   Week 13   Mon. Dec. 7 Multiple quantifiers Ch. 10: Multiple quantifiers Ch. 11: Numerical quantification (time permitting)    Final examination period: Dec. 9 - 20  Final exam date: TBD  